Fair enough.
Mr Robertson, you're all by yourself.
I am by myself.
You're welcome.
Although I've got a-
The others are hiding. You're welcome to phone a friend if you need.
All right. We're in your hands.
Great.
So I thought I'd just kick off with just a few comments about the
SEPs, Supplementary Estimates document.
So my name's Bonar Robertson, I'm a principal advisor in the budget team,
at the Treasury.
And then I have got a
range of senior finance people from across the
public
sector who are here to help answer questions on the supplementary estimate.
So,
I will get them to come forward as you have your questions.
So we're here to discuss the supplementary estimates for the year ending 30 June
2026. It is a large document,
but I hope that we can support you in your role in understanding and scrutinizing
the document today.
So I'm just going to quickly cover off what the supplementary estimates are, key
things to look out for, and what our briefing does before we get into
questions. So the supplementary estimates
provide details of changes to appropriations since the
estimates for '25/26 were finalized through budget
2025.
The document is organized into different votes by alphabetical order, and
within each vote there are tables summarizing changes to budget
amounts, followed by detailed supporting information for
appropriations where there have been changes.
So the supporting information included for each appropriation will depend
on what has changed, with the three most common changes being,
firstly, where there are changes to the amount of an existing appropriation.
So where there's a change in the amount, the supporting information will include a
written explanation for the reason for the change.
The second change is where there are changes to performance
information for existing appropriations.
So this might include removing or changing the wording or targets for
existing performance measures or introducing new performance measures for
those appropriations.
And those changes are reflected in the supporting information for the
appropriation.
The third main change you'll see is where there is an entirely new
appropriation that has been introduced during the year.
So in this case, you'll be able to find the same level of information you would
expect to see in an estimates document.
So that includes the scope, what is intended to be achieved with the
appropriation, performance information,
and who will report on what will be achieved with the appropriation.
So where there's been no changes to an appropriation since the last
estimates, there will be no supporting information provided, as the
25/26 estimates still provide the most relevant and
up-to-date information.
So just quickly on the briefing that we have provided the committee.
So the purpose of this is just to pull out the significant changes.
Obviously it's 920 pages, so just trying to pull out the big changes and
draw those to your attention. And includes reference to where you can see
them within the document.
That's kind of the end of my opening comments.
So happy to basically get into questions.
We can get the experts in the room to come up and help answer those as well.
Thanks, Bonar. All right. We've got questions from Deborah.
Right. I have quite a number.
There's quite a lot of interesting stuff in here.
Look, what I want to start with is the
changes
on... Now I'm using the Treasury's document here because it's the easiest
one for us to follow.
It's the revenue impairment of debt,
that's sitting on page 10 of the Treasury document.
So it's impairment of debt and debt write-offs.
So, it's an increase of $480 million.
So that seems to be an anticipation of more
debt being written off. And I want to link that
to the increase in the
emergency benefit of $127
million. So these to me both point to
revised forecasts based on what?
Maybe ask Rachel to come
up.
Kia ora. Rachel Parker, Inland Revenue.
I can answer the first part of your question.
I might need somebody to answer the second part.
But in just in terms of the impairment of debt and debt write-off, the vast
majority of that increase there is actually a technical
buffer. It's for appropriation management purposes.
So $450 million of the increase you see there is actually
to manage the appropriation and avoid or reduce the
risk
of a breach of appropriation. That is, we've always got that buffer.
A significant amount of our debt arises in the last three months of the year,
when we have two major tax dates. And due to the uncertainty in the current
environment, we increased that buffer this year to cover that.
So our forecast is actually $1.5 billion.
Yeah.
And the remainder is appropriation management.
So I totally get the technical nature of that change.
Yeah.
But ordinarily that technical, that's quite an increase to that buffer.
So what's the underlying conditions that have led you to increase the buffer by
that much?
So at the time that we set the
supplementary estimates for this year, and at the time we were doing our last
forecast,
the Middle East had just kicked off, and we were uncertain as to what the impact of
that on taxpayers' ability to pay in the last three months of the year
would be. So that gave us an increase from what we've previously put in there as a
buffer.
Okay. So part of it is due to the situation in the Middle East.
Yeah.
Were there any other factors going into that?
That was largely the
uncertainty that was put into there to increase it from the buffer we had last
year.
Yeah. How's that panning out so far? Do you know?
At the moment, our valuation is done after year-end, so we don't actually know the
value of the
impact on impairment till after year-end, but debt at the moment is, we're not
seeing that come through at the moment.
Right. So hopefully we're not going to need that.
Hopefully.
Okay. We'll see how that goes, but thank you for that.
We'll see. Yeah, as I say-
Yeah
... it's after year end available.
But if we could go to the emergency benefit increase.
Yes.
That's a lot of increase in the emergency benefit.
Who have we got here for-
Got Brad.
MSD.
Just introduce yourselves.
Yeah, morning. I'm Brad Young, CFO from MSD.
Morning, Peter Moorer, from MSD as well.
Yep.
So that's a substantial increase in the amount of the emergency benefit,
a higher number of people than previously forecast.
Why did you have to change that forecast?
So the forecast for
benefit recipients is based on unemployment forecasts that come through
from the Treasury. So the number of people that will be on the benefit has
increased through the year and it
will be higher than we forecast last year.
So why has that forecast changed?
So I need to get behind-- I mean, that's the signal to us-
Yeah
... is the increase in the number of emergency benefits.
Yeah.
But what's the economic conditions underpinning that?
Yeah. It is quite a complicated forecasting model.
It's probably better if we respond in writing, because I just don't want to
mislead the committee on that.
So you can't tell me what the economic conditions are that relate to the
increase in the number of emergency benefits?
We get the macroeconomic conditions from the Treasury
that we use to factor in our forecast.
Do we have someone from Treasury here who can answer that?
Not a
macroeconomic expert in terms of the forecasting.
It just seems very odd that Treasury
does a lot of forecasting work,
and you would've thought that a year ago they could look at what was going on in
the economy and have a reasonable stab at what was going to be needed.
So if I go to, again, this is the Treasury's report, and if I go to
page
of
Treasury's report, and it says, "Accommodation assistance is going up by
72 million,
super by 85 million." It's very odd that that couldn't have been predicted.
Mm-hmm.
Social development, sole parent support up by 86 million.
Students' allowances up by 41 million.
Again, odd, that shouldn't have been predicted, because we normally
anticipate that education is counter-cyclical.
Yeah.
The support of living payment has gone up by 70 million.
The winter energy payment up by 24 million.
I'm assuming that's linked to the increase in the number of beneficiaries full
stop.
Mm-hmm.
And debt write-downs is 64 million. These are all increases.
Why, a year ago, was Treasury unable, using its
reading of economic conditions, to understand that there would be
significantly increased expenditure on benefits?
Happy to respond in writing.
I think there's two separate parts.
There's the macroeconomic story that we'd have to respond to in
writing. Equally, there is also, as Rachel explained, for the
IR debt write-downs, there is an add-on to benefits
at the supplementary estimates time to manage our appropriation risk.
Sure. That's the technical stuff. I'm actually trying to get at the macro.
I get the technical-
And that is a large reason for the increase.
It's a large-
Yeah.
The technical-
Sorry. With these, a lot of the increase is due to the appropriation
buffers used to manage the risk of unappropriated expenditure.
Sure. But we-
Yeah
... ideally we shouldn't need that.
Yeah.
That's quite a significant increase in the appropriation.
So it says that something is going on in the macroeconomics that Treasury didn't
predict a year ago.
Well, there has been, obviously, the Middle East crisis since we
did that.
But that's quite recent. I think Treasury needs to come back
to us and explain-
Yeah, sure
... why they couldn't forecast this a year ago.
And an aside from, because it's not just the Middle East impact.
I have a supplement.
Right.
Good.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Look, I just really want to reiterate that.
There's a number of things that we'll get into in terms of
the shifting across MYAs in this as
well. But really do need some reassurance that this
is not simply parking fiscal risk off the books,
these buff-
very much what it looks like. These are incredibly large buffers,
so it's increased by $480 million to $2
billion, this buffer. That's an exceptionally large
buffer. So I'm somewhat surprised that we can't get some
answers in this very technical part of the hearing around
this to the questions that Deborah's posed
around that. So maybe if we go through each of the votes-
Yeah. I think we need to
... in some detail.
Yeah.
I think that's probably the best way to do it.
Yeah. We've just got a supplementary from Todd.
I wonder if we just do that, and we-
Just so I'm crystal clear for the,
Ministry of Social Development folk, your models though, were based on the
information you're provided from Treasury.
Yes.
That's correct?
That's the one I'm worried about, the technical stuff.
No, I'm just getting them because-- I'm not saying your line of questionings
aren't, but just so everyone's crystal clear, particularly those online, that
MSD are using numbers supplied to them by Treasury.
And obviously we need to have a discussion about Treasury's numbers, but that's a
separate... Yeah.
Sure.
Great.
Yeah.
Meagan, back to you.
Okay. So if we have a look at the impairment of debt relating to
student loans,
that includes a $245 million buffer.
Sorry, what page are you on, Meagan?
I'm sorry, this is just my-- I've made myself a oops.
It will be in
education on that.
Why is there such a large contingency for student loan
losses that's been factored in there?
Revenue actually.
So again-
A living loan
... this is based on preparation, and it's an appropriation management, as you
say. We don't get the valuation till after year-end
We have an interim valuation. This was performed as at December.
Since December, obviously, the economy has moved a lot.
It is not unusual for us to see movements in either direction from the interim
valuation to the year-end valuation.
And so this has, again, been increased this year because of the uncertainty at the
time that this was put in place, just around particularly
overseas payments and people paying those back.
So it's all overseas?
It's not all overseas, but it was largely around-
Okay
... a mix of both, but it was just around repayments coming back.
And as I say, it's not unusual for us to see movements between the interim and the
year-end. So-
So is some of that fewer
student loan holders in employment and making their payments?
That was the concern at the time, because as I say, this was done before the Middle
East even kicked off, and it was uncertain as to what the extent of the
impact would be.
What I think would be really useful is for the committee to see
the modeling that sits behind that in terms of
the breakdown of the
forecasts around it in both wages and employment, I
guess, as what goes into that of student loan holders.
A written response, yeah.
In terms of a written response, that would be very useful.
Okay. Can I carry on?
Yeah.
I can start going vote page by page.
Page.
Yeah.
So I just want to look at the disability support services.
This is on page two of Treasury's report.
And one of the changes there is
a decrease of 200 million in disability support services
due to the return of underspends. Which underspends were they?
So
it's 200 million of underspends in disability support services, so 200 million that
hasn't gone to people who need it.
So can I just bring a bit of context first?
So in budget '24 and budget '25 for disability support services,
the government has invested quite a bit of funding in disability support,
1.1 billion in budget '24 over five years.
So what's the
200 million?
The $200 million is funding. It
is an underspend, it is
savings that has been returned to the center.
What was it for?
So it is for disability support services.
But specifically, what parts of dis-
So I can't-- We can provide a written response in terms of detail,
specifically which type of services within
disability.
All right. So I think our disability community wants to know because there's a lot
of people who's really struggling there. But yeah.
Sorry, do you have a supplement, Megan?
Just going through the vote.
Oh, yeah.
You keep going.
Sorry.
Oh, okay. I want to go to-
Sorry, I just had a quick supplement, Deborah.
You were going to say the budget '24 and '25.
Were you trying to say that there was,
well, an allocation and it was overcooked or?
No, there's been significant investment in disability support services-
Yes
... through budget '24 and '25.
Yes.
In budget '24,
1.1 billion was invested over five years.
Yes.
And in budget '25,
sorry, one billion was invested over four years.
So it's a cut.
So that's additional funding.
So that was potentially an over-allocation in those budgets, is that
what you're saying?
It's a cut.
I don't want to say that. It's just an investment by the government.
That's what I heard.
So I want to go to climate next. Do you want to go, Megan?
Okay. You do climate.
Okay. So I'll just now go to-
Yeah
... climate. So it's sitting in environment.
This is on page
six and seven of the Treasury report.
So we know that-- Have we got someone here who understands the ETS?
We don't have an environment person here, sorry.
That would-
All right. So what we've got is we've got
the ETS, as we know, is down at quite a low price level, so obviously that
means that the government allocation in there is changing around.
What I'm interested in, though, is in the increase in the number of units forecast
for the post-1989 forestry sector due to additional
forest being registered in the emissions trading scheme.
Do we know how much additional forest went into the ETS?
I don't have that detail, but we can provide that information.
Do we know how we can predict how much forestry is coming into the ETS over the
next few years?
We can ask the Ministry for the Environment for that information.
Okay. It's just that that's going to create considerable uncertainty
around the ETS, and the ETS figure is so low it's hardly
driving change in the sector. So this is a bit worrying.
We can provide those in a response.
Okay. All right. Thank you.
Julianne Genter, did you want to jump on there?
Yeah, sure. I had some questions about
in the vote transport and the multi-year appropriations.
Sure.
And the first one was about the
increase of 200, is that 239?
So up to 4.5 billion in
Crown funding for transport projects.
In
the notes here, it says that there was a transfer from a program,
an underspending the capital,
Crown funding for transport projects capital,
capital investment package, and I was just wondering if
you could speak to the detail of what that was.
David Kidman, CFO, Ministry of Transport.
So the 262 million increase there is about
50/50 transfer of unspent funding from
previous-
Multi-year
... projects.
Yeah. But I mean, I was just wondering, the capital investment package,
what was that?
This is a range of projects, such as the RONS and
the recently announced State Highway 2 Drury, where the Crown
funds, in addition to the usual
funding through the National Land Transport Fund.
Across the $4 billion, the-
The
underspend from the prior years as it rolls, we roll the
appropriation this year into a new out year, which just
brings in more of the out years funding into this number.
I see.
So it doesn't represent an underspend in itself.
Okay.
But within that there are other differences, such as
property acquisitions that are slower than they expected, or consenting
that is slower, or weather delays.
In the context of the wider fund, it's not a huge number-
No
... but NZTA do have the detail and they'll be in later this week.
And so this is
not a loan that will be paid back from the NLTF.
This is like
a grant of-
Yeah, this is a specific crown funding-
Four and a half million-
Over and above
... for five years
to supplement the NLTF.
Yes.
Until the end's finished.
Okay. Can I ask another question just while I'm here about the Chatham
Islands replacement ship?
Should we, I'm s- oh, it's transport. Later, yeah.
It's still transport, yeah.
Yeah.
I was just wondering because originally, I think the original
appropriation
was
to actually buy a ship, and now it's switching
to a payment for shipping services.
Does that change
how it's considered? I don't know.
Was it always OpEx, or was it CapEx initially, and does it
matter?
This is all OpEx. Is this the Chathams inquiry?
Yeah. The Chathams, yeah.
I didn't hear you earlier. Yes. So with the new boat,
the Crown is supporting the provider to-
Yes. Yeah. Right
... purchase that, and that is operating funding from our perspective,
although it becomes a service concession arrangement.
Yeah.
And,
therefore an asset does appear on our books.
Okay. But the original appropriation
goes back to 2022. Is that right?
Yes.
Is that when?
Yeah.
Yeah. And
so far it looks like
quite a bit has been spent, like almost half of the original
appropriation in this financial year.
And then the estimate for the next year is 3 million left, and there's
only 8 million left. Is there any detail about like,
because the concession is going to go on for-
20 years
... is it 10 years?
Only 10 years?
20 years.
20, yeah.
20 years. 20 years of that.
So this is the purchase phase where the funding's provided to
the
partnership who are procuring the vessel.
Yeah.
And then there's operating costs-
Operating costs
... in addition to that across the period, and the amortization
of the service concession asset. So
we would expect spending to be upfront-
Okay
... in this arrangement.
Right. Ah, so it's upfront spending.
Mm.
Okay, cool. Thanks.
So a couple of things on theme, I guess, of boats and things.
So looking at page seven of Treasury's report,
the appropriation for an equity injection to Ferry
Holdings Limited to replace the Cook Straits ferry.
So this is more money going into the Cook Straits ferry.
That's in addition to the cancellation fee that was paid.
Do you want me to ask
John?
What page?
Seven of Treasury's
report.
Hi, John Tumath from Treasury.
Yes, this is the appropriation for the
procurement of the new ferries.
Right.
So this is the allocation from the
budgeted TAD contingency into Vote Finance for the
portion of the ferries that have been through ministerial
decisions.
Right. So it was in the TAD contingency last time around.
It's just-
So in the budget-
Mm
... in Budget '25-
Yeah
... the full ferry, 1.7 billion, was in the estimates.
Yeah.
Now it's been
cascaded down to Vote Finance, a portion of it-
Yeah
... for the management of that release.
Has there been-- All right. So I'll have to go and have a look.
Has there been any increase to what's gone in-- I'll have to go and look at the
budget.
No.
Right. Okay.
This is a portion of the original.
Right. Okay, thank you. But also just sitting in, again, in
this vaguely transport space, and sorry, I'm not quite sure who's going to answer
this one, it might be Treasury or somewhere.
So sitting on page 19 of the Treasury
report, it's Business Science and Innovation.
It's a
decrease of $70 million
for the
vehicle charging hubs program. But it says it's
decreased by 70
million because there was a cabinet decision to transfer the remaining
problem to the National Infrastructure Funding and
Financing Limited. So
that's the decrease side, but I couldn't quite see where the increase side of it
went, because it was a decrease that I'm not quite sure if
I'm on the right track. Yeah.
Yeah, I think you're on the right page. Yeah.
Yeah.
Palolo Lava, Jason Tulima, Director of Finance and Performance from MB.
So of that 70 million, what you're looking for is the detail, where the
increases went. So the reprioritized funding went to Solar for
Schools, the LNG procurement.
There was some funding for grants to support energy infrastructure investments,
offshore renewables, and consumer data rights.
Some state sector-
So it's straightly 70 million out of the vehicle-
It's reprioritized within that kind of space.
Yeah
...
This is really interesting because
politically it's tricky because it was a major campaign
promise last time around. So now we're saying that that money is no
longer available for vehicle charging hubs.
It's gone to the variety of other worthy endeavors as well, but it's not there for
vehicle charging hubs.
Yeah. It's been reprioritized, yeah.
Okay. So that's been reprioritized into other
energy efficiency and the like measures-
Yeah
... and all those sorts of things. But I want to be really clear, it's not
available for the vehicle charging hubs.
Yeah. I can confirm that in writing.
No, that's okay. I'll take your word for it. I totally take your word for it.
I just want to have that. Okay, thank you.
Can I just supplement Deborah?
Yeah.
Just before you leave.
Oh.
So there was a transfer,
and it went to NIFCO, which is essentially an
off-balance sheet.
Mm-hmm.
So that Crown charging commitment could now
continue, but just under a different entity-
Yeah
... which sits off Crown balance sheet.
Is that-
Yeah. It might be a different thing that we're talking about.
I think we might be talking about two different appropriations here.
Yes.
Yeah.
So there's one on page-
... 17, which I think is what Jason was talking about there-
Which is the energy reprioritization
... which is the reprioritization.
Yeah, that's straightforward.
19 is the one.
19.
And then 19, there was $70 million transferred into
NIFCO.
Yeah, it's been transferred into EK and NIFCO. Yeah.
Yeah.
So it's just disappeared into the... I mean, I shouldn't say disappeared.
No.
It's been transferred into it. But how do we keep track of what's happening to it
within
NIFCO?
Probably...
Okay. Do we have any way of keeping track of that-
Yeah
... $70 million?
Because it's off-balance sheet. Yeah.
I don't know if it's off-balance sheet. We can follow that one up and provide that.
That'd be great. Thank you.
Yeah. To show you where that's gone.
Megan.
If you're still going on transport, yeah.
No, no, I just want to make sure we can track that somehow-
Yeah
... what's happened to it.
Well, yes, they provide reports annually.
Yeah. It's just we can't ask-
We can't see it. We can't-
We can't ask questions about it, Todd.
Well, we can.
In this.
Not in this, no.
In the way we would.
No.
Okay. Look, thank you.
Thank you. So education.
Great.
So the school property
portfolio management appropriation is cut by
$236.382 million.
Mm-hmm.
And that's due to revaluation impacts, capital charge adjustments, and multiple
transfers and reprofilings. So how
many property projects have been delayed or downscaled as a result,
and in which regions?
So Kevin Martin from Ministry of Education.
So this is a technical accounting adjustment based on the book value of the assets
that reduced by $2 billion.
Is it... Mm.
So it doesn't impact on any existing projects.
It's existing schools, what their book value was.
Okay. So-
So it's the capital charge and depreciation impact of that
... can you talk us through the change in
methodology around the depreciation and capital charge in there
so that we can see that that isn't just an accounting change
to mask-
We can provide that to you, yeah. It's-
Can you just talk us through that now?
Yeah. So it's basically called optimized depreciation
revaluation. So it looks at what a current school is now in its
current state, if that was, say, to be destroyed by fire, what it would cost
to rebuild using current technology, current processes,
current methodologies. So it's not a replacement in
terms of like for like as such. So it's what that would cost in terms of
cash flow out, if you like, to replace a school.
So-
As we've got better with technology and using modular classrooms, those sorts of
things, the actual cost to replace a school if it was destroyed
has actually reduced over the last couple of years.
And so this is across the entire property portfolio?
Across the portfolio, yeah. And phased in different ways, but that's part of the
annual valuation that's done. Our annual report's got the details around that.
What do you mean phased in different ways?
In terms of the
valuations. So as new schools come on board, then they're valued on that same
basis as well. So-
Even if they're not built using modular classrooms.
So every school-
Every school
... is now valued-
Every school is valued on the same basis, yeah. Is what I mean, yeah.
Right. Just so I am going to be very parochial for a moment
because there's some delayed projects
within here, too. For example, there's $12 million
has been carried forward because of delays in the Christchurch
schools rebuild.
What schools are they?
Or what projects?
I'd need to come back with that. I don't have it in front of me.
Can we have a breakdown?
Sure. Yeah.
Can we, on that, because there's quite a bit of
funding that's
being transferred into outyears-
Yes
... because of delayed projects,
can we have a breakdown of all the projects that are
part of that
funding being carried forward, i.e., they're delayed and haven't been delivered
within-
Mm-hmm
... the original timeframe that they were budgeted for?
So if we can have a breakdown of that by school.
Sure.
And with it by region as well.
Just in terms of the... I think
that's all. Have you got anything on the depreciation, Deb?
No.
I know you love to discuss depreciation.
No. I thought you were having more fun with it than me.
Okay.
Well.
Okay. We'll come back to other things. But thank you for that.
I've got more. Oh, sorry, not education. Different.
Okay. Go bigger.
Different.
I just want to go to, and I'm not quite sure what's going
on here. It's labor market from page nine of the Treasury
report,
and workplace relation safety, and
an appropriation that has decreased by $100 million.
It's due to the creation of new multi-category appropriation to support the
government's health and safety work reform program,
enhancing ministers' visibility of spending and performance, and
enhancing ministers' ability to shift funding as priorities change.
So it just sounds like giving ministers more scope to shift money around.
Is that right?
No. So we moved from an annual appropriation to a
multi-category appropriation to help differentiate WorkSafe's
spending against specific outcomes.
So the change occurred at OBU, and therefore some funding remained within the older
appropriation,
while the receipt moved to the new appropriation.
It's fiscally neutral, but it was more towards
giving more transparency around the outcomes.
So I totally agree that it's fiscally neutral. That's not the problem.
Yeah.
Enhancing ministers' ability to shift funding as priorities change
So what authority do ministers then need to shift funding around?
So multi-category appropriation,
obviously
what the total appropriation is the authority.
Yeah.
And then
there is flexibility to move within categories of that
appropriation, that multi-category appropriation, to reflect maybe
putting funding in a slightly different...
So you're still contributing to the overarching scope and purpose.
You can't do it outside of that.
Sure.
So it still needs to be for workplace
health and safety.
Mm.
But it provides that flexibility,
and actually transparency on what activities are
actually that funding's being spent on, because it breaks it down into those
different categories.
I just guess that in terms of Parliament's ability to scrutinize
ministers' plans, and then the way departments actually
deliver them, if you've got enhancing a minister's ability to shift
funding around, it means that up in advance we don't get much.
We're sort of a little bit left to what the minister wants to do.
Now, this is an exaggeration I know, but what the minister wants to do on a
particular day, instead of Parliament having had the opportunity to
scrutinize what's going on. I get that it's within an appropriation, but it's-
I guess, yeah
... sounds an awful lot like ministers having quite a bit of almost operational
control there.
They're able to direct their departments
on funding things. I think with this one
too, you're going from
just annual appropriation where it's all just in one-
Mm
... to an appropriation that has different categories underneath that.
And I think that probably enhances
Parliament's ability to see what that's actually being spent on, rather than it
just being-
Sure
... 100 million sitting in one appropriation.
You've got 100 million spread over
more clear categories of spend.
Yeah.
No, I'm just feeling antsy when it says enhancing minister's ability to shift
funding. You go, "What?"
Okay. I want to go to, this is just a minor one.
Thank you.
Biosecurity. This is on page
14 of
Treasury's report, an increase of 60 million
into biosecurity. Was that the hornets, was it, or?
Mm.
Does anyone know?
Sorry. Just-
Yeah, that's okay.
But I'm afraid I don't have anyone from MPI here
today.
There's a large number of reasons for the change on page
25 of the supplementary estimates.
Yeah.
The
largest increase is under spends from the previous year coming into
this year.
Sure.
And there was a transfer to fund Mycoplasma
bovis compensation payments of 13 million.
Okay. So-
And then there is also 10 million for the hornets.
Yeah.
So those are your main, those are your big changes there.
Yeah. No worries.
I think I am just... Oh, no, the other thing,
and the last one I wanted to do is, and I'm sorry this is a tax
one,
or maybe it's the R&D tax credit. So again,
it's page 16 of Treasury's report.
We're looking at revenue,
the R&D tax incentive. So,
that's the appropriation, so it's the revenue vote,
and it's a decrease in 25 million
in the funding available for the
R&D tax credit. Now that R&D tax credit, it's not
capped, is it? People have to spend money.
But why is that down by 25 million? Do we know?
Thank you.
It's
down based on the forecast expenditure from the R&D
survey, the latest R&D tax survey, and also
changes to the GDP.
Mm. So you're predicting that as part of economic conditions, spending on R&D
is decreasing, therefore the amount of tax credit being claimed is decreasing.
Yeah.
Okay.
Thank you.
Matt Regan.
Sorry, just sort of taking it up a level here really,
there's a trend in the estimates that really
does show delays in delivery across a number of
projects. There's slippage into out years and money being
deferred into out years. For example, we've got the Regional
Infrastructure Fund, 257 million, Rail,
203 million. What I talked about within the schools
budget, there's nearly a billion...
Well, that's getting close to $700 million,
just in those three that I've rattled off.
So how is Treasury tracking these delays and
slippage across all of the votes, and do you
maintain a consolidated register of delayed projects
and the associated fiscals around those deferrals?
Yeah. We can probably provide a more fulsome written response, but we do
have
our
quarterly
reporting on our significant investments through our
investment management system,
that is reported through to
ministers and is made publicly available.
So that's on the larger projects,
in terms of how those are tracking, and the risks.
So that's the main way, is through that investment reporting that we gather
that information.
Great. So just-
Yeah
... in terms of
questions we'll put to Treasury for our team.
Obviously in writing, can we have a breakdown of all the
project deferrals that are contained in these
supplementary estimates,
and broken down by region?
I mean, obviously there's got to be a threshold.
Yeah. We'll just, yeah.
Yeah. But-
It'll need to be based on the information that we have on-
Absolutely
... on these projects.
Yeah. Ab-
A lot of these smaller stuff is held within agencies in terms of managing the
projects.
So how does Treasury monitor that? We're having all these delays.
There looks to be just over a billion dollars
worth of delayed projects sitting within these estimates, at a
very conservative estimate. So is Treasury
tracking that and working with agencies around
what the cost of these delayed projects are?
For the significant
investments, we have that central tracking.
In terms of
other delays that flow through into appropriations, we provide advice to
the minister when we do baseline updates,
which
provide... If there's delays, they need to
request transfers into future years, which require
them to explain why there is the delay,
why it's caused outside of department's control in order to transfer that funding.
So we have those processes as well that help understand where those delays are.
So for the
larger delays-
Mm
... and we can see, and I'm not talking about individual projects, I'm talking
about votes. So if we have a look at regional
infrastructure funds, schools, these things that we're talking
about,
was advice given to departments on what the fiscal
impact, obviously nothing's cheaper to build than it is today,
in terms of deferring those into the out years, what the cost implications
and the potential cost blowouts could be by the delay in the
projects?
I don't think that Treasury's provided that sort of advice.
So that would be agencies that would be-
Yeah
... giving that to their-
... their... Okay, thank you. And just one small one.
There's
a small cut,
but it's death by a thousand of cuts really, for the Warmer Kiwi
Homes project. There's a further $8.5 million that's been
taken out of money to insulate New Zealanders' homes, to
keep them warm in winter.
Are you able to tell us how many
home insulations that would've been?
I will have to provide that in writing.
Okay.
Yeah.
I can ask at the energy estimate, too. Okay. Thank you.
Fantastic.
Thank you.
Members, it appears to be no more questions.
Thank you, officials.
Thanks.
It's quite a broad area you have to cover, so I appreciate you coming in.
Mm.
Thank you.
Thank you. Can you just do it for me